On the first Monday of the month of April, 1625, the market town of
Meung, in which the author of _Romance of the Rose_ was born, appeared
to be in as perfect a state of revolution as if the Huguenots had just
made a second La Rochelle of it. Many citizens, seeing the women flying
toward the High Street, leaving their children crying at the open
doors, hastened to don the cuirass, and supporting their somewhat
uncertain courage with a musket or a partisan, directed their steps
toward the hostelry of the Jolly Miller, before which was gathered,
increasing every minute, a compact group, vociferous and full of
curiosity.

In those times panics were common, and few days passed without some
city or other registering in its archives an event of this kind. There
were nobles, who made war against each other; there was the king, who
made war against the cardinal; there was Spain, which made war against
the king. Then, in addition to these concealed or public, secret or
open wars, there were robbers, mendicants, Huguenots, wolves, and
scoundrels, who made war upon everybody. The citizens always took up
arms readily against thieves, wolves or scoundrels, often against
nobles or Huguenots, sometimes against the king, but never against the
cardinal or Spain. It resulted, then, from this habit that on the said
first Monday of April, 1625, the citizens, on hearing the clamor, and
seeing neither the red-and-yellow standard nor the livery of the Duc de
Richelieu, rushed toward the hostel of the Jolly Miller. When arrived
there, the cause of the hubbub was apparent to all.