We visited the so called Elysian Fields and Avernus; and wandered
through various ruined temples, baths, and classic spots; at length we
entered the gloomy cavern of the Cumæan Sibyl. Our Lazzeroni bore
flaring torches, which shone red, and almost dusky, in the murky
subterranean passages, whose darkness thirstily surrounding them,
seemed eager to imbibe more and more of the element of light. We passed
by a natural archway, leading to a second gallery, and enquired, if we
could not enter there also. The guides pointed to the reflection of
their torches on the water that paved it, leaving us to form our own
conclusion; but adding it was a pity, for it led to the Sibyl’s Cave.
Our curiosity and enthusiasm were excited by this circumstance, and we
insisted upon attempting the passage. As is usually the case in the
prosecution of such enterprizes, the difficulties decreased on
examination. We found, on each side of the humid pathway, “dry land for
the sole of the foot.” At length we arrived at a large, desert, dark
cavern, which the Lazzeroni assured us was the Sibyl’s Cave. We were
sufficiently disappointed—Yet we examined it with care, as if its
blank, rocky walls could still bear trace of celestial visitant. On one
side was a small opening. Whither does this lead? we asked: can we
enter here?—“_Questo poi, no,_”—said the wild looking savage, who held
the torch; “you can advance but a short distance, and nobody visits
it.”